# Ocean acidification does not overlook sex: Review of understudied effects and implications of low pH on marine invertebrate sexual reproduction

*Link to manuscript coming soon*

## Abstract

Sexual reproduction is a fundamental process essential for species persistence, evolution, and diversity. However, unprecedented oceanographic shifts due to climate change and anthropogenic effects can impact physiological processes with important implications for sexual reproduction. This article reviews how ocean acidification can impact sexual reproductive processes in marine invertebrates and highlights current research gaps. We focus on four economically and ecologically important taxonomic groups: cnidarians, crustaceans, echinoderms, and molluscs. We identify trends in reproductive performance in acidified conditions, discuss the spatial and temporal variability of experimental designs in the context of reproductive traits (gametogenesis, fertilization, and reproductive resource allocation), and provide a quantitative analysis of the published literature to assess the effects of low pH on fertilization rates across taxa. Our recommendations for future research will allow for better understanding of how reproduction in invertebrates will be affected in the context of a rapidly changing environment. Since models often consider the reproductive parameter as a “black box” and/or often overestimate it, our findings and suggestions will help to design and develop better tools to project future ecological trends in response to global change. We argue for increased focus on fundamental reproductive biology of marine invertebrates and associated molecular mechanisms that may be vulnerable to shifts in ocean chemistry.

## Supplementary Material

- Supplementary Text: Extended review of ocean acidification impacts on marine invertebrate reproduction
- [Supplementary Table 1](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/Studies-Cited.docx): Table of ocean acidification and reproduction studies cited in this review
  - [Supplementary Table 1a](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/Location-Data.csv): Location information for studies cited in this review, used to generate Figure 2
  - [Supplementary Table 1b](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/Year-Published.csv): Year published for studies cited in this review, used to generate Figure 2
  - [Supplementary Table 1c](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/Reproduction-Category.csv): Reproduction category information for studies cited in this review, used to generate Figure 2
- [Supplementary Table 2](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/fertilization-metaanalysis/Fertilization-Data.xlsx)

## Figures

- [Figure 1](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/conceptual-figures/1-wheel/figure1-wheel.pdf): Sexual reproduction processes in marine invertebrates discussed in this review.
- [Figure 2](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/2-metadata/Multipanel-Plot.pdf): Graphical description of studies used in this review. a) Geographic study locations (from left to right): Eastern Indo-Pacific, Temperate Northern Pacific, Temperate Northern Atlantic, Tropical Atlantic, Southern Ocean, Temperate Southern Africa, Arctic, Central Indo-Pacific, and Temperate Australasia. If organisms were collected from a different marine realm than where the experiment took place, only the collection location was considered. ie charts represent the proportion of taxa-specific studies conducted in each region, and numbers underneath the pies represent the total number of studies in that region. b) Cumulative number of papers published for each taxa from 2004 to 2020. An additional echinoderm study was published in 1924. c) Number of positive (black), neutral (dark grey), or negative (light grey) OA effects for various reproductive processes by taxa (from left to right: cnidarians, crustaceans, echinoderms, molluscs). The total number of studies for a reproductive process are included in each panel.
- [Figure 3](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/fertilization-metaanalysis/fertilization-all-figures-20210308.jp2): a: Fertilization success by ΔpH (the difference between experimental pH and control) across all taxa. Meta-analysis was performed using a binomial regression model using all experimental data (yellow curve) and pH values ≥ 7.6 (green curve). The general trend indicates that fertilization success decreases with pH when considering all taxa; however, the effect of pH on fertilization rate is only significant across the full pH range (yellow curve). b-d: Taxa-specific binomial regression models for Cnidarians (b, six studies), Echinoderms (c, 16 studies), and Molluscs (d, 16 studies). ΔpH predicts echinoderm fertilization only when data from all experimental pH is included, and does not significantly predict fertilization rates in cnidarians or molluscs. In all figures, each point reflects the average percent fertilization reported by one study at a ΔpH. No fertilization studies were found for Crustaceans.  Ribbons indicate 95% confidence intervals.
- [Figure 4](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/conceptual-figures/4-big-picture/figure4-bigpicture.pdf): Organism, population, community, and global-level implications of OA impacts on reproduction for commercial and restoration aquaculture, wild fisheries, and conservation and restoration of wild populations. Implications mentioned are not necessarily exclusive to one category.
- [Figure 5](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/conceptual-figures/5-mechanism/figure5-mechanism.pdf): Sexual reproduction mechanisms that may be compromised by OA. Changes in the chemical environment can impact the release of hormones and pheromones that trigger gametogenesis, or gamete release in broadcast spawning species (1). Sex determination and differentiation processes (2), gametogenesis timing, and energy allocation (specifically maternal provisioning) (3) can be impacted by low pH. Gametes undergo substantial chromatin reorganization and DNA methylation (4) that can impact how gametes and subsequent offspring respond to acidified conditions. Spawn timing may be affected by OA (5). Gamete bundles undergo breakage, further exposing gamete intracellular conditions to changes in extracellular pH (pHe) (6). To begin the fertilization process internally or externally, chemoattractants are released from eggs and sperm (7). A single sperm binds to the egg with the aid of gamete recognition proteins (8). Successful fertilization triggers calcium release or an egg jelly coat to prevent polyspermy (9). After internal fertilization, brooding may shield embryo development from changes in pHe or expose embryos to more extreme conditions (10).
- [Box 1](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/conceptual-figures/boxes/1-glossary.pdf): Glossary of key reproduction terms
- [Box 2](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/conceptual-figures/boxes/2-experimental-considerations.pdf): Experimental considerations for future OA and reproduction studies

## Repository structure

- [conceptual-figures](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/conceptual-figures): Directory with InDesign and image files used to create Figures 1, 4, and 5
  - [figure-1](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/conceptual-figures/1-wheel): Subdirectory with Figure 1-specific files
  - [figure-4](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/conceptual-figures/4-big-picture): Subdirectory with Figure 4-specific files
  - [figure-5](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/conceptual-figures/5-mechanism): Subdirectory with Figure 5-specific files
  - [boxes](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/conceptual-figures/boxes): Subdirectory with files specific to Boxes 1 and 2
- [metadata](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/metadata): Metadata for studies included in this review
  - [figure-2](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/metadata/2-metadata): Directory with files specific to generating Figure 2, including the [R Markdown script](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/metadata/2-metadata/Study-Summary-Figure.Rmd)
- [fertilization-metaanalysis](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/tree/main/fertilization-metaanalysis): Directory with files specific to running the metaanalysis on fertilization data cited in this review, including the [R Markdown script](https://github.com/yaaminiv/paper-oa-reproduction-review/blob/main/fertilization-metaanalysis/Fetilization-Analysis.Rmd)
